So how did you feel to be?
My last book, I believe, was your collective non-fiction, which was the occasion for our last talk.
And now, tell me a little bit about this novel, how it
if it's in the grand scheme.
I'm also curious about your selection of the years, 84 and 1912.
Is it your research that kind of moves you towards picking these years, or are these essential years in the cycle of your characters?
Well, that's what happens.
These people lived their lives in these years, and I'm stuck with them.
This book I started to write in...
1976.
Wow.
And I have a note to myself about writing a novel that's a flaming corset.
And in 1976,
I think I finished Billy Phelan.
Billy Phelan has now become like the crucible for the whole cycle.
Remind me to go back to another book called An Albany Trio, which you may not have seen yet.
I don't think anybody has seen this book.
This is a well-kept secret.
They were supposed to have it out with... I haven't seen it in any bookstore yet.
Is this Viking snowing?
England.
There's a paperback?
It's legs building an ironweed in one volume.
plus a new intro by me called Prelude in a Saloon.
I had to get that then.
And call Meg Linehan, and she'll get an hold of it for you.
She'll fax it, I'll get it up to you.
She could fax you.
All you really need is the...
the prelude.
Yeah, sure, but, you know, she'll take care of it.
But if you're going to write this, because this is how the cycle came to be, you know.
And in this, I make Danny Quinn the author of the Albany Cycle.
You got that?
Danny Quinn is Francis Phelan's grandson.
He's George Quinn and Peg Phelan's son.
He's ten years old and Iron Week.
And, um,
He grows up and goes into the army and he's a pal of Corse and Purcell in Ferialbone.
They're in the army together in Germany.
And he marries a Cuban girl at the end of Ferialbone.
He's also the grandson of
Daniel Quinn of Quinsburg.
So anyway, he has written this cycle, and this is a story of how these various books came to pass.
And in this story, he's interviewing a gangster, and the interview has been set up by Billy Phelan, who's also
They're in the saloon, owned by the gangster.
They used to hang out with Mike Steinle, and they're talking about Mike Steinle.
And in the course of the talk, Billy becomes prominent in the conversation, and it occurs to Danny Quinn that...
Billy needs his own book.
Billy needs his own book, so he has to write Billy Phelan.
And then he writes Billy Phelan, and in the course of that, he goes back to a previous book that he wrote, and he quotes the passage from a character in that first book, which is...
about Francis failing before Francis was married or anything, and he quotes this little moment of vignette.
And then Francis becomes eminent in Billy's book and demands his own book.
So one book begets the other, and he comes back to it.
It's all told as a short story.
It's a piece of fiction, but it's also an essay.
on how this cycle came to pass.
You can get Meg to fax it to you this afternoon.
She can overnight it, actually.
It'll take me a while to transcribe this tape, anyway.
Anyway, this book I started as soon as I finished Billy Phelan, and I meant to write a complete novel
called the flaming corsage and also the play which would be a three or four act play i didn't know the play is the play that we have at the at the back that edward doherty writes right and i was going to write the whole play and have the play and the novel in the same value the play would be kind of a coda it would be a parallel element but you know they would work together oh it is kind of a coda sure it is it is but it's in quite a different way you know
to write a whole play.
It would be ambitious beyond my capacity in those days.
Except you are staging a play, I think we should point out, aren't you?
Yes.
The play is closed on June 9th, last Sunday.
They had the dates around.
I thought it was just opening in July.
No, no, no.
It opened May 8th and closed... It was supposed to close June 2nd, and it was such a hit, they extended it a week.
Oh, that's...
And they may bring it back for two more weeks in September.
Did they print?
Did they publish the... No.
No.
It's a work in progress.
And I'm still fiddling with it.
And I think it'll be a long time before anything gets set in stone.
Is it the kind of thing that you hope to bring it down to... It's got a shot.
Down to the Big Apple?
I don't know.
Maybe.
A lot of people are asking to see copies of it.
It's a little early to get the reaction.
How about the skills as a fiction writer, though?
I mean, do you have to think differently as a playwright?
Very.
This is really the second play I've done.
The first play.
It's taken from a novel I wrote, Very Old Bones, and it's still in process.
I haven't finished that.
As soon as I get home, that'll be my next creative project.
to put that into a final form and get it into a workshop situation in Albany.
At this stage, I'm calling it The Sparrows.
That's all it is.
I don't know what the title will be, but it might be that.
The other play is called Grand View, and it's a political play.
And it's really part of the cycle of novels and stories.
I mean, it's no longer a cycle of novels because now I've got a play in the middle.
And the play is about Patsy McCall, the political boss, who is a character very much so in Billy Phelan, and who I have a full novel that I'm going to write a long book about one of these days.
Can I get you in the glass of wine?
Yes, please.
And it's 1944.
Dewey is the governor, although he's never named, it's just the governor.
And he's trying to break the political machine in Albany in order to enhance his reputation.
And he's running for president against FDR.
And it's Labor Day.
And...
It's a closed down summer hotel in Saratoga called the Grandview Lake House, which comes out of very old bones.
It's a conflict between the governor and the political boss through an emissary who used to know the political boss 20 years ago.
The emissary also brings his wife, who used to be the boss's old girlfriend.
So you have a love triangle, and you have a political war all wrapped up together.
Do you see the writing of the plays as an artistic challenge, or is it just whether it's... Oh, very much so.
Yeah, it's definitely an artistic challenge.
It's a totally different form.
I mean, it's... I'm wondering what's driving you to move in that direction where clearly you're so firmly established as a novelist?
Well, it was... It's twofold.
The primary purpose... I do believe was...
An unconscious one was to make myself equal to Edward Doherty in order to invent him.
You're getting these great lines.
I'm sorry.
I can see these things in quotations.
I was intimidated by the idea of writing that
three or four-act play back in the 1970s.
And I just kept reading about theatre and turn-of-the-century theatre and grounding myself in it.
And eventually somebody came to me from the local theatre in Albany and said,
we want to stage Billy Phelan, we want to stage legs, we want to stage iron, we don't want to stage anything you want to do.
I said, no, no, no, no, no.
And I had nothing to give you, and I'm not going to write a poem.
So then Norman Mailer came up to an event in Albany at the Writers Institute, which I run, at the University at Albany.
We had a, about four years ago, 1992 I think it was, we had a thing called Telling the Truth.
And it was a state of the art of non-fiction.
And we had 35 or 37 major American non-fiction writers and a few select novelists.
who also dealt with non-fiction like Mailer and Mary Gordon and myself.
And the three of us were on a panel together.
But Mailer at that point was the president of Penn.
And he wanted to put on some kind of a fundraiser for Penn with a...
a group of plays by novelists.
And he asked me, did I have anything?
And he had to ask Doctorow, and Styron, and Joe Heller, and Susan Sontag, and himself, and a bunch of other people.
It never came to pass.
They never used anything.
But I did write a play.
And it was called, it was a one-act play.
It's called Dinner at the Phelan's, and it was right out of very old Barnes.
And Mailer liked it very much and gave it to Frank Corsero, who was then sort of the artistic director at the Actors Studio, the Actors Workshop, whatever it was.
And he loved it.
And they encouraged me to make it into a full-length play, which I did.
And they wanted to do it at the Active Studio, develop it.
And so I wrote it again, and then I wrote it again.
And the more I wrote it, the more they loved it.
Except it still wasn't quite working.
It was still novelistic.
And I was still learning how to...
You know, to organize the unities of time and place and characters and not have 45 characters running around in different time periods.
But I think that you as a novelist really are aware.
I mean, alert more than most to the unities, I think.
Well, in a sense, I've learned a great deal from the theater and from the movies all my life.
And the sense of confusion, especially in this book, and the use of dialogue has been part of my kit bag.
But it's still a very different art form.
And I've got a lot of work cut out for me to get this thing called the Sparrows into...
serious shape as a play do you have to see it performed it helps enormously i mean this play grand view i i uh it began as a collaboration collaborator fell by the wayside and i carried on all by myself
and in January we had a stage reading of my draft and it was good but it was flawed seriously by a couple of gaping flaws and we all knew it but then it had to be fixed so I went back and I rewrote it and
Then we did some rehearsals and I kept rewriting constantly and constantly, you know, right up until three days before opening night.
I mean, I was driving the actors crazy.
I one day gave them 60 new pages out of an 82-page draft.
Wow.
And, you know, there were all changes in
staging directions, dialogue cut, everything, you know.
I mean, were you kind of directing it?
No, no, no, no.
I have no idea about directing.
I would never do that.
But I'm very close with the director, who is Maggie Mancinelli Cahill, who is the artistic director of the...
Capital Repertoires here.
Why don't you go ahead and have a bite?
Maggie Mancinelli Cahill.
M-A-N-C-I-N-E-L-L-I Cahill.
C-A-H-I-L-L.
She's out of New York, and she has just become the new artistic director of Cap Rep, Capital Repertory Theater in Albany.
Not so soon, sir.
I know that.
And...
She directed the piece, and I learned an enormous amount.
You know, I had never gone through this process at all.
This is my allergy season, too, I have to say.
I take pills every day.
So anyway, this came along, and I couldn't resist it.
It was just they got a grant to do it, and it seemed ideal to try.
And I had a kind of a ready-made story of this political boss that I wanted to use, and I'd for years been thinking about doing a...
a story at a summer hotel after Labor Day.
So I had the setting as well.
And I had the hotel.
And it just worked.
And I was very happy with how it all came out.
And I love the process.
And I'm not afraid of it anymore.
And I want to do it again.
Because I got another one that's sort of ready to go.
It helps, certainly, that you're in an area where they're not only able to stage them, but willing and delighted to do it.
And you have a very good company.
And that's enviable, because I would say the hardest thing in the world, even more than getting a first novel published, is to get a play stage.
I can't imagine why anyone would want to be a playwright today.
You think of how almost impossible it is, I mean, for a young writer emerging...
I mean, I did an interview with Albert Albert, and I said, what do you tell people?
And they said they want to be young people, and they want to be playwrights.
He said, first of all, he said, I tell them to do it only if they can't live without doing it.
And he said, and then, if that's the way you feel, then I'll give you the wisdom of my ears.
He certainly doesn't advise it, because staging... He doesn't advise it at all.
That's right.
Well, let's get back to that.
We aren't going to talk much about the novel because that's my job, you know, to read it, of course.
Well, to telling you about the basic origin of the novel is the key to this.
And so, you know, I kept wanting to do it over a period of like 20 years.
I mean...
But the conception of it, let me interrupt, actually precedes Iron Weed?
Yes.
When I couldn't write this, I wrote Iron Weed instead.
That was my next book after Billy Phelan.
As soon as I was finished with Billy Phelan, I started to write this, and I spent like a summer...
trying to to make it work and i never did what was the difficulty in this artistically well i didn't know what was really going on in the love nest for instance i didn't know who those people were i had some ideas about them but i i really didn't know uh what happened in the love nest it was it was a mystery to me and um
It was a mystery because really everybody was lying.
And they were lying to me as well as they were lying to one another.
And it took me many, many thrusts and parries and so on to arrive at the conclusion of who was in there and what they were doing there.
And then it was a
It was an engineering problem to construct the plot.
You said it was an engineering problem.
And it became a mystery story.
And I didn't realize that that's what I was writing.
Is this your first mystery story?
Yes.
It's the first one I'd finished.
Back in 79 or 80, I started to write a thriller.
I got about 100 pages in.
And what was the motivation for that?
Make money.
At the same time, I...
I became a screenwriter, and I made some money in doing that.
I didn't make any money on the thriller.
Because the thriller, I got 80, 90 pages in it, and it was turning into a comedy.
I couldn't take the thriller genre seriously, and I didn't know how to.
I got into a Damon Runyon mode.
Everybody was cracking jokes all the way around.
I don't know if you know Richard Yates.
Do you remember Richard Yates?
I do, yeah.
wonderful writer remember him saying he tried mindfully once to try and write a commercial bestseller he said God if I knew how to do this I'd do it and he said it always would turn out to be a farce you know he couldn't you know inevitably return to what you do and I guess all these stories I mean do you think all these stories are there and they're waiting for you to go in and chronicle them or is it like
Michelangelo, who says that the sculpture is beneath the marble, I think... Yeah, all you have to do is cut away the excess.
Cut away the excess.
Well, you cut away a lot of excess in this novel.
That's one of the things that you wanted to do is make it a very tight... Right, sure.
...very intentional.
Well, I have a... You have a sense of certain... A sense of the characters.
But their stories as well?
The stories develop.
There's usually a situation, not a story.
The novel I'm planning to write, not necessarily next, but about the political boss...
is the establishment of the party 1919 1921 and i'll take that i hope through 1931 or 32 32 probably which will give it the first decade of the party's existence i have no idea whether i'll really do that but that's that's the impetus i have that
have the 20s to deal with in a different way from the legs.
But this story or these stories, they certainly do figure when you're writing other stories.
I mean, because you kind of make references.
Right.
They all intermesh now, you know.
They have their own integrity, but there's also a kind of...
world that they are operating within, and I have to be cognizant of that.
You know, I have to be... You know, when I wrote this play about Passive McCall, Grand View,
I felt like I was stealing from my novel.
Because I'm giving so much.
In a sense I am, but in a sense I'm not.
In a sense that this is 1944, he's another creature now.
What he was in 1921 to 1932 is not clear at all to me.
I don't know what I want to do with that novel.
But I know he's there.
I know a lot of people are there.
I got some great politics.
I got so much stuff.
Are you still doing tremendous research?
I've done the research on that one.
I mean, all I'm going to do now is figure it out.
The research comes when it's necessary.
You know, like...
I had to research the Delavan fire in this one.
I had to research that fight on the barge.
I knew about both of them years and years ago.
But I knew there was some kind of coverage that must have been on the barge fight, because it was such a horrendous event.
It was based in the real 1912 event.
And eventually I found it.
But, you know, it added something.
I could have done without it, without the research.
That's not the way you work.
No, I like to do the... Well, the real stuff is so often better.
Anything you can make up.
It's really so wild and so funny sometimes.
Crazy.
This is pretty good when you get rid of the peppers.
Let's talk a little bit, obviously, about the themes in this novel.
I'm amazed that you would have had an Irish Catholic marrying a Protestant girl at that particular point.
Well, that was part of the discovery, you know.
I knew she was... I invented this whole thing like that when I was writing Billy Phelan, because I don't know where the invention came from.
But it was all there in Billy Phelan.
The mixed marriage, the Loveness scandal, the killings, the writing of the play.
the closing of the play, the death of Katrina, the fire that destroyed all his papers.
You knew all that.
You go back and look at Billy Fallon, you'll see it.
It's all there.
Everything was there.
But, you know, it's an outline of facts.
It's like having a passersby sketch of an individual.
the scene of a crime, you know, like that guy in Royster last week, took a pen sketch of him, and it sort of looked like him in one of the sketches, but that's very remote from what the full human being is, you know, but that's what you discover, you start with those outlines of an individual, of a situation, and
It just grows.
You talk to yourself about it.
The complications are there to be solved.
The more complications are solved, the more there were to be solved.
the various motivations of the people, how to get them to do it, who did it, and why did they do it.
And it's so compact, though.
I mean, you did this with a great deal of economy.
Well, that was willfully... The form was something I wanted to do all my life, which was to do this.
A book in fragments and jumps.
It was... You know, if I was to write this as a...
coherent saga, the thing would be two miles long.
And I would die before I got to chapter six.
So I really wanted to do these jump cuts, this kind of fragmenting of the story in order to
is there such a word, ellipticize?
To ellipticize the narrative for the sake of the reader and make the reader work.
One of the things that
I've heard about, you know, a couple of reviewers who said that this seems too short.
These are readers who demand expansiveness or something like that.
What time is your next thing?
2 o'clock.
More or less 2 to 10.
No, no, no.
You've been picked up at 2.20.
I've had a five-minute conversation with you.
Yeah.
Okay, well, let's get on to whatever other things.
Am I on to the right stuff?
I think we're covering the things I want to... I think you're talking about the idea that you had about the concisement of the building is really important.
Yeah, well, I don't know where it came from, but it was one of the books I wanted to write would be like that.
In a sense, the ink truck was that way.
You know, it made those jumps...
I guess I'm interested also, again, I'm not asking many specific questions about the novel, because I don't think I have to do that.
Pardon me.
You've talked often about Albany and the cycle, and I'm wondering, is there an end, in your view, to the cycle, or does the cycle keep going as long as you keep going?
Or do you think at some point it will be complete?
And you'll want to move on to other areas?
No.
And it is all part of the course?
There are no other areas.
Okay.
No, it's just a kind of constant.
Could I get anyone anything else?
Enjoy your lunch.
Thank you.
It's a constant growth from within the stories themselves.
I have, you know, every so often I have a novel of the 60s now that I want to do about a priest.
I have a novel of pre-war 40s, late 30s that may have something to do with theater but also
Probably about a lawyer, and maybe it's a court case, I'm not sure.
But it's more a character-driven event at this stage, that novel.
That seems to be the one I want to write, and yet I haven't had a chance to... I've got these three novels now that are always...
floating free in my brain to tempt me to come and do this one, do this one, do this one.
And I don't know which one to do.
I don't know what the... There's nothing compelling in any of the three yet.
They all are there, and I really want to write them all.
And you're certainly not doing them in any kind of chronological fashion or systematic.
No, nothing like that.
It's how they present themselves and...
Tony Bennett was at the ABA, believe it or not.
Yeah.
This is very nice, I have to say.
That looks beautiful.
The oil is like this.
Was it poached?
Did they see poached?
Yeah, very good.
One killer quote on this.
which I probably got going, if I go back to my earlier interviews, I'll find it.
But again, the meaning, the metaphoric significance for you of Albany and why Albany, or did you know it was Albany with the ink truck or with Billy or with Legs, or that, what the heck, I'm into it now and this is where it goes.
I didn't know when I was in Legs, no.
Legs was Albany and I was discovering it, but...
I had no idea what I was going to do.
These things presented themselves.
Legs came out of my desire to write a political model about Patsy McCall.
I was going to do that way back in the late 60s.
Almost 30 years ago.
And as soon as I started to write it, I decided I should put Lakes Diamond into it.
Oh, that's another book.
Maybe it's a play.
Probably it's a book.
Maybe it's a long, short story.
I don't know why it is.
Maybe it's part of something else.
Which is the...
The death of a lake planet.
Kind of a notion of how to do that now.
I think I was involved in Albany in the Ink Truck in Lex.
That was a question.
And I didn't.
I was very much...
involved in the projects as they were.
I took the rest of your role, I'm sorry.
That's okay.
Don't worry about it.
You're welcome.
That's your addition, not mine.
It's okay.
I just needed a knife.
What do you want, butter?
There's butters right here.
This one, I don't want all that bread.
Well, was there any kind of a... I'm wondering if there's any of yourself in any of these characters.
Certainly here we have a newspaper man who's also a creative writer.
He becomes a playwright.
So, I mean, how much of Will Kennedy is in any of these characters?
This one in particular.
I'm inside all of them, I presume.
But they're...
They're really not, none of them are autobiographical.
Well, a newspaper man is a very useful kind of a character, isn't he, too?
No, I mean, really, because he observes, he's a trained, he's present at a lot of things, and I know Ed Doctorow's book last year, or was it two years ago, The Water Works,
very effectively use a 19th century New York City newspaper man, you know, narrating of it.
An untold story.
Cominantly enormous figures.
Every, uh...
Everything I do.
Journalists figure probably everything I do.
That's my life.
I've been a journalist all my life.
It's been a great...
thing to be.
Led me places I would never have gotten otherwise.
Thank you for that.
But do you think you bring a reporter's eye to your fiction?
I do.
I hope I don't bring a reporter's language or clichés.
I hope I bring, you know, a novelist's imagination.
Well, first thing, you're not doing these things on deadline either.
That's right.
This is very good.
I've traveled with mine.